THE LORD OF THE RINGS

among such excellent and admirable hobbits. Tremendous outburst of
approval.
I don’t know half of you half as well as I should like; and I like less
than half of you half as well as you deserve. This was unexpected and
rather difﬁcult. There was some scattered clapping, but most of them
were trying to work it out and see if it came to a compliment.
Secondly, to celebrate my birthday. Cheers again. I should say: OUR
birthday. For it is, of course, also the birthday of my heir and nephew,
Frodo. He comes of age and into his inheritance today. Some perfunctory
clapping by the elders; and some loud shouts of ‘Frodo! Frodo! Jolly
old Frodo,’ from the juniors. The Sackville-Bagginses scowled, and
wondered what was meant by ‘coming into his inheritance’.
Together we score one hundred and forty-four. Your numbers were
chosen to ﬁt this remarkable total: One Gross, if I may use the expression.
No cheers. This was ridiculous. Many of the guests, and especially
the Sackville-Bagginses, were insulted, feeling sure they had only
been asked to ﬁll up the required number, like goods in a package.
‘One Gross, indeed! Vulgar expression.’
It is also, if I may be allowed to refer to ancient history, the anniversary
of my arrival by barrel at Esgaroth on the Long Lake; though the fact
that it was my birthday slipped my memory on that occasion. I was only
ﬁfty-one then, and birthdays did not seem so important. The banquet was
very splendid, however, though I had a bad cold at the time, I remember,
and could only say ‘thag you very buch’. I now repeat it more correctly:
Thank you very much for coming to my little party. Obstinate silence.
They all feared that a song or some poetry was now imminent; and
they were getting bored. Why couldn’t he stop talking and let them
drink his health? But Bilbo did not sing or recite. He paused for a
moment.
Thirdly and ﬁnally, he said, I wish to make an ANNOUNCEMENT.
He spoke this last word so loudly and suddenly that everyone sat up
who still could. I regret to announce that – though, as I said, eleventy-one
years is far too short a time to spend among you – this is the END. I am
going. I am leaving NOW. GOOD-BYE!
He stepped down and vanished. There was a blinding ﬂash of
light, and the guests all blinked. When they opened their eyes Bilbo
was nowhere to be seen. One hundred and forty-four ﬂabbergasted
hobbits sat back speechless. Old Odo Proudfoot removed his feet
from the table and stamped. Then there was a dead silence, until
suddenly, after several deep breaths, every Baggins, Bofﬁn, Took,
Brandybuck, Grubb, Chubb, Burrows, Bolger, Bracegirdle, Brockhouse, Goodbody, Hornblower, and Proudfoot began to talk at once.
It was generally agreed that the joke was in very bad taste, and more
